Typically when you know some in high
school when you're so much into
programming the natural progression is
that hey you know what I'm already
building apps actually after high school
decided to go out and study law. In the
process of studying law I got back to
building apps developed an app which
then became quite successful and one of
the most sold productivity apps on the
app store.
>> With confidential SPL tokens that you
guys have built if there's a payroll
that's happening what does the end user
receive? So they receive confidential
balance directly.
>> What kind of roles do you hire for? What
is the expertise one needs to be able to
contribute to the core protocol? Well,
>> core protocol it's very cryptography um
the ability to also reveal things and
and make them public
>> engineering/org culture you have right
on one side you have people coming with
like tremendous amount of academic rigor
on another end it's like you know
startup engineers very curious to you
know understand how do you balance these
things what does the culture look like
>> it's very difficult because you can't
really break things
>> hello hello welcome to another episode
of the only devs podcast. Today we have
with us Yanik the founder of RM. Archium
is a multi-party computation network and
they are doing the probably one of the
OG teams if I may use that word that
have been working on privacy on Solana.
Remember them all the way from their
elusive days. So so happy to have you
here Yanik. welcome to the podcast.
>> Yeah, thanks for having me.
>> The first question we ask everyone is
how did you get into crypto? Is this
your first job or were you doing
something else before? Yeah. So, um I
initially actually after high school
decided to go out and study law. Um and
um when I was a child, I taught myself
how to program um but still decided to
study law. And then um yeah in the
process of studying law um I got back to
um building apps um on the side um and
developed an app which then became um
quite successful and um yeah one of the
most sold productivity apps on the app
store and at that point I then decided
okay let's switch things up and maybe go
back to computer science um and then I
decided to instead of studying law study
computer science and mathematics um and
yeah That's where I met my co-founders
and those were really the people that
got me into crypto. Um before that I had
um only small touching points with
crypto but meeting my co-founders um we
then had this shared um passion I guess
for cryptography privacy um and um I got
at that time into into crypto and then
it made sense for us to apply all of
those things and try to solve some of
the most complex problems in distributed
systems I guess uh which is how can we
execute um in a distributed way on fully
private private um encrypted data.
>> Typically when you know some in high
school when you are so much into
programming the natural progression is
that hey you know what I'm already
building apps let me go all into it. So
the shift to law sounds super
interesting.
>> I think for me it it I I had this
feeling of okay I already know how to
program how to do all of those things.
So um I at that point didn't really see
the need to to study that um because I
was already programming so much um and
studying um computer science itself I
think didn't give me too much knowledge
because I already um was developing
things um but more importantly I think
what um this study at university gave me
was a deeper mathematical and
cryptographic knowledge um which then
allowed me to again teach myself mostly
um cryptography and all of those things.
But um yeah, I think um for me um the
turning point really was then switching
back again um developing an application
um solo developing that um and having uh
that be a major success. And so um that
really drove me to um yeah to to want to
found something bigger um to want to
build something bigger um and I guess
that then started this whole um journey.
>> That's awesome. So cut to today you're
working on RTM right like also speaking
of bigger vision like what is RTM and
why RTM? Why is like often times when
people in the crypto industry speak
about crypto, it's crypto the currency
but not crypto the cryptography.
Whatever you describe like kind kind of
sounds super rooted in the whole cipher
punk ethos. Curious to hear about like
you know why you are building archum.
>> Yeah. So I think um why we're building
archium. I think it's not just something
that um is required in in crypto. I
think it's required as a whole also in
in web 2. Um and um what we are solving
for and this new primitive that we are
introducing to the world is what we call
encrypted computing. So being able to
run arbitrary computer programs in a
fully encrypted way. Um where all of the
data that is used within those
computations can remain fully encrypted.
Um and as you hinted at earlier um one
of the technological cryptographic
primitives that we are utilizing is
called secure multi-party computation
which as the name suggests already um
yeah requires an element of distribution
and decentralization for for these
cryptographic um protocols to to work.
Um and so
that's I guess one one aspect in in in
which this crypto connection comes from
because Archium itself um needs to be
instantiated in the form of a
distributed network, right? Um and um
secondly, these kinds of encrypted
computations are incredibly valuable for
onchain applications. They are
incredibly valuable for blockchains
because on top of blockchains,
everything by default is public, right?
And so we are introducing a primitive to
these to these networks and um I guess
right now Solana where it becomes
possible to execute anything in an
encrypted way while being on top of a
public distributed ledger. Um and so I
think there's an element of a cypher
punk ethos to that um where um it's
important to have privacy but I try to
not think about it that way. And I think
um this kind of cyberpunk ethos is a is
a fallacy that um that people have
fallen into in the past where um privacy
itself becomes a sort of political issue
only um uh moralizing stance where
you're essentially saying hey we need
privacy why isn't anyone adopting
privacy I think that's what what people
have been doing in the past and I think
that's the entirely wrong approach um
the the approach that that that we are
taking is that privacy itself um should
be a logical business decision to adopt
um and that's how this technology is
going to be adopted. So our task is it
to empower applications and allow
applications to become more powerful and
there's many aspects to that. There's
the really technical and mathematical um
cryptographic aspect to that, but
there's higher level aspects to it as
well where um we need to abstract away
all of those cryptographic things for
the user experience and developer
experience to allow applications to
become more powerful because privacy
isn't anything holding them back but
instead adding new features. And so
that's the way that um we go about
things and that also um is why we at
Arium um evolved in the way that we have
evolved where initially um as you Z
check we were called elusive and we're
using different set of cryptographic
primitives but then evolved into archum
which now allows anything to be
encrypted while um everything can be
computed um and
um yeah in the meantime what we also did
um and I think that also speaks to the
role of Arum not just enabling um
encrypted computations on chain but also
for anyone to use right also for
traditional companies to use is that we
last year end of last year acquired our
largest web two competitor who have been
doing encrypted computations for um um
yeah traditional industries like
healthcare defense and others um and so
that's um that's the role that I see
argument not in a cypher punk role but
instead in enabling anyone be it a
business be it an onchain protocol
anyone to have more powerful
applications because now you can process
more sensitive data. Yeah, thank you so
much for such a thoughtful answer. It
kind of you know it speaks to it
anything gets only adopted if it makes
business sense and you know if it's a
only if it is a four delta implement
over what exists right versus you know
it it being because it's a virtuous
thing to do. Switching gears here
slightly a little bit and getting a
little bit technical. You mentioned
encrypted computation, right? So when
you say encrypted computation, what what
does it really mean? Are people is the
the circuit or the function itself is
that the one that is encrypted or is it
the inputs to it that is encrypted and
you know the computation happens over
this over the cipher text. So how how
should people uh understand this?
>> One of the new primitives that that
Archium is introducing is encrypted
shared state. Um so when you normally
execute in a smart contract environment
um you operate over shared state, right?
Where you have a smart contract and then
there's maybe account data that is used
within those um smart contracts.
Essentially whenever you're submitting a
transaction to a ledger um that gets um
yeah becomes part of this state machine
right so you're operating over shared
state um and we are allowing for the
operation over encrypted shared state so
just like within a normal smart contract
environment you can have some functions
that determine how state transitions
take place um over this shared state now
you can do so in an encrypted way which
means the data that is being used is
encrypted. So the most simple example
would be um yeah let's say um um a
protocol where
all of us um the three of us let's say
have some confidential um encrypted
token balance on chain. Um and then
using that protocol we we for example
can compute the average of our token
holdings without revealing any of um of
our individual token holdings. That's a
computation that takes place over
encrypted shared state because all of
our state is encrypted and we can run a
function over all of the state without
anyone seeing the individual underlying
state.
>> Fascinating. You guys also launched like
confidential SPL tokens, right? Um so h
how how does that work? Is it on one end
there's like for example there there is
uh this confidential balances as a token
extension in the token 22 program. So
where where does confidential SPL token
fit fit in the spectrum?
>> Yeah. So, Solana over the last few years
has been developing um what they call
confidential transfer extensions um the
confidential transfer extension for the
token 22 standard um which basically
allows you within your um EOA to
additionally have a confidential balance
um and then I can send someone else who
has such an account a confidential
transfer. So, they receive this
confidential amount into their
confidential balance. So publicly nobody
sees the individual balances and the
amounts that are being transferred. The
issue with that is that
simply by the technology on which um all
of this is based namely CK zero
knowledge proofs is that it only allows
EOAs to send to other EOAs. So if I have
a wallet that supports that, I can send
it peer-to-peer to another wallet, but I
cannot as a smart contract, as a onchain
program on Solana utilize such a
balance, which then greatly hinders um
the entire protocol. Um I guess at the
end of the day leading to the status
that it's currently in where um there
isn't any adoption because anything I I
cannot really do anything with my token
balances, right? And so that's where
confidential SPL token comes into play.
It it resolves all of those issues. So
it allows any program on Solana to
manage a confidential token balance. Um
and then you can build very interesting
applications. The most simple
application um that we that we have
currently uh confidential SPL token
isn't live yet but will be very soon. Um
so the most simple example application
would be a confidential payroll program
where you have some smart contract um
that that manages a confidential payroll
account where all of the um salaries sit
basically and then the transfers to all
of the employees is confidential and
something like this wasn't possible in
the past. You would need to control a
single wallet and then send individual
transfers out. But now it can sit in a
multisig. Can security sit on chain? And
um yeah, what all of this enables is
then applications like confidential
lending protocols, entire confidential
DeFi applications, right? All on on top
of the standard. And the nice thing
about how we designed the standard is
that it's fully interoperable with what
Solana has built. So it adds all of
those missing features to to what we
have already um baked into the chain,
which is incredibly powerful. and also
things like being able to send
confidential transfers to anyone which
previously wasn't possible because if
Czech for example just has a normal
wallet but hasn't even considered um
receiving some specific token in a
confidential way I couldn't have sent
him um a confidential transfer but now
with the confidential SPL token that
becomes possible I can just send him any
SPL token in a confidential way and yeah
I think the the most powerful aspect to
all of this really is that as a program
you can now manage those balances. So a
program which previously just used let's
say SPL token to perform some DeFi
actions can now just use confidential
SPL token and send out confidential
amounts and compute with confidential
balances um and encrypted values which
is incredibly powerful. I think
>> just to double click on that that there
are two things that you mentioned that
that I mean that uh are that it got me
very curious. You mentioned that you
know in the confidential transfer
program since it depends on CK proofs
using it between non
EVOA wallets or that is in a smart
contract setting becomes hard. Curious
to understand why that is actually the
case. Uh the other question uh is is you
mentioned you know the confidential SDL
token
you it need not necessarily be optin how
exactly does that work even if I haven't
enabled that setting how how does it
work such that the protocol can send
something privately to me
>> first thing with zero knowledge proofs
um zero knowledge proofs operate over
what I usually call isolated secret
state so I have some secret. Um, and a
zero knowledge proof then is me proving
some fact about the secret by running a
computation over that secret um, without
revealing the secret. But in order to do
so, what I need to have is access to the
secret and nobody else can have access
to the secret, right? which enables
something like these very simple
confidential transfers that Solana has
built where I have I know my balance so
I can generate a zero knowledge proof
submit that on chain it gets verified
and a transfer occurs into um someone
else's balance but what a smart contract
cannot do is have exclusive access to a
secret and generate zero knowledge
proofs right and that's where archum
comes into play where with archum the
zero the the smart contract can now
generate zero knowledge proofs and by
being able to generate zero knowledge
proofs the smart contract can then
perform those confidential transfers
because of um yeah the MPC based
encrypted computing that we enable. So
that's one aspect that's the most um
most important primitive for for the
system um to be interoperable with the
um token 22 transfer extension um where
a program can now manage those those
balances. Now, in regards to being able
to send tokens to someone else who maybe
hasn't opted into it, um what what I
need to do in the in the standard that
Dave um designed is I need to know your
public key. Um but you only have a
public key for for encrypting uh a
confidential transfer if you have opted
in. So what we enable with Archium is
that we say you instead sort of transfer
it to a program and then you can just
claim it. Um so you don't need to
generate a a key up front but instead RQ
does that for you.
>> Uh with confidential SPL tokens that you
guys have built um if there's a payroll
that's happening what does the end user
receive? Do they receive an SPL token or
do they receive a different account that
they can maybe eventually claim to a
token?
>> So they receive um a confidential
balance directly. So um that's that's
important. So what they can do with that
confidential balance is they can do many
things. They can keep it as a
confidential balance and um the the nice
thing again is that um you can basically
send that to anyone because it's already
part of the Solana protocol, right?
Because then it's a EOA again. So you
just receive this confidential amount.
Now since we enable any program to now
use this standard you can use this
confidential amount to let's say perform
some DeFi action or pay with Solana pay
or whatever right you can do so in a
confidential way but what you can also
do is you can in turn just convert it
into the original SPL token right so you
can then say okay I now want it to be
non-confidential public USDZ so you can
just turn it into that as well yeah
>> interesting you mentioned I can actually
use it in a D5 application So if I have
a confidential balance, I can literally
swap it on Jupiter and get a
confidential token on the other side
like
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean Jupiter for for for
that requires to to support um to to
integrate um our our confidential SPL
token, right? But um yes, you can. And
the nice thing really is that again you
don't you don't have to um use anything
that that that we've designed basically
because you just have your confidential
balance and then you transfer something
in an account um and based on the amount
that you have transferred some swap is
being executed. So you don't even have
to use some additional cryptography and
encrypt anything. So there's really um
no requirement for for for additional
integrations which makes that so
powerful because it's just something
that a program now integrates. So you
can transfer it to an account owned by
the program. They perform a swap and
transfer something back to you. So yeah
um down the line what you will see is
that you receive some confidential um
tokens through payroll and then you can
instantly in a confidential way swap
them. Yeah. Fascinating thing about this
is that it opens up the design space to
build so many other confidential
applications. Anything that you that we
think you know that exists today can
actually build a confidential or or a
private version of it. Right. What are
the type of applications that you're
seeing that that that people are
building or you or you're personally
most excited about? Yeah, I think
especially um all of the D5 primitives
really um and um I think it's it's it's
so powerful because the the concept that
that you're working with as a developer
is simply um I take this account balance
and I don't know multiply it by whatever
fee I'm taking as as D5 protocol right
and then I transfer that and transfer
this amount without you knowing the
amounts but you can still perform this
this kind of arithmetic right and then
you just call transfer like you would
normally with with with normal SPL
tokens. So death experience wise um you
don't have to understand any new
concepts and and I think that's really
the the powerful aspect to it and that
that enables developers to to build
these kinds of applications. So we
haven't yet opened it up um confidential
SPL tokens um to to developers. what
we've built internally is a few D5
protocols um as as example protocols and
for example within a few hours I
developed an entire confidential landing
protocol um last week on on Friday or
Saturday I think um which was a very
seamless experience just building a
confidential lending protocol where I
don't know let's say um yeah before
before the confidential SPL token um
that we've designed
I I mean the amount of work that as a
developer you would have to perform is
you basically would have to start from
zero and build out all of the
cryptography and by having this standard
and this interoperability
as you said it becomes so seamless and
the entirely new design space is opened
up where you can say okay um I'll take
my existing application and add
confidentiality or you can also say okay
um let's think about defi in an entirely
new way and what's also fascinating
about this I think is that um
um what you can do and I think that's
that's something that that most people
don't realize is let's say I now have a
confidential lending protocol and people
are um there's there's a lot of activity
happening but nobody knows how much
activity is happening right which again
can be a downside to all of this but um
that doesn't have to be the case you can
do things like let's say every day the
volume numbers are being decrypted and
so you can verifiably ly on chain Z, how
much lending has been taking place over
the last 24 hours, things like that. So
people can really play around with um
the ability to also reveal things and
and make them public.
>> Absolutely love it. When when can
developers start building on this like
what's the how do they get started? And
also I you guys I also noticed that you
guys are doing uh RPM fellowships. So
how can people the best way how can
people get started and also the audience
listening to this
>> except that all of the fellows into our
fellowship program that we've um done
together with super team earn so over
the next few months um all of those
fellow fellows um will build some very
exciting applications um we currently
have arum itself on on public test net
but we will have the confidential SPL
token standard um live on test net at
least um
it's So it's it's a very difficult
thing. Um people listening to this
podcast um are developers so they know
how difficult it is to actually give um
precise estimates on on timelines but um
we are getting our stuff audited at the
moment. So um as soon as possible
>> are you guys other than the fellowship
um what kind of roles do you hire for?
What is the expertise one needs to be
able to contribute to the core protocol?
Well,
>> yeah. So, um for for a core protocol, um
it's very cryptography heavy. Um so um
I'm I'm very proud of the of the team
that I've assembled with Archium where
we have um yeah some of the best
cryptographers in the world um be part
of Archium and especially for
confidential SPL token we we had to come
up with some
very um impressive I guess um new
cryptography actually to to make this
work. um uh from the outside it looks
seamless and yeah that's um super
straightforward but actually if you if
you look at the cryptography there's a
lot of heavy stuff involved to to get
this to work um so in a core protocol
there's a lot of cryptography um but um
there's also as archum is a
decentralized network right there's all
of those aspects as well archum itself
isn't a blockchain um but it's still a
decentralized network so there's all of
those mechanics X that that need to be
um developed for any distributed network
to work also within ARUM um which means
the node software development which
means all of the communication taking
place between those nodes. Um and so um
I guess the the ST and um the stack that
we have really is this this core
cryptographic stack. there's this this
node software networking um scheduling
um distributed computations part of the
ST but there's also things and and I
think that's one of the most important
aspects actually the higher level things
like um the interfaces that developers
use um we we have a custom Rust compiler
called Arcis um which enables Rust
computations to um to be compiled into
circuits which then can be executed uh
cryptographically
Um and so those are important aspects um
to to allow developers to build these
seamless applications because they then
don't have to notice anything um below.
So um I think um the only thing that we
in a core protocol don't have um because
we are infrastructure right is um
extremely userfacing things where it's
um user UI applications right we we have
people building out those to um for
demos example applications right games
for the communities things for the
community things like that um but for
the core protocol itself that's that's
not part of the core protocol. Yeah,
>> I'm actually curious on the on the
engineering/org culture you have right
on one side you have people coming with
like tremendous amount of academic rigor
and on on another end it's like you know
startup engineers who ship fast break
things and given that you are a startup
you're a cryptography startup working in
this space who also has to ship fast I'm
very curious to you know understand how
do to balance these things. What does
the culture look like?
>> It's very difficult because you can't
really break things. Um I think I think
it's easier to to ship fast and break
things if you're if you're developing I
don't know uh social media network. I
don't know what some some sort of
application where at the end of the day
it doesn't matter too much if if things
break. Um we are we've we've started um
working with um web 2 um customers as
well in the in the area of of encrypted
um machine learning where um you don't
want data to to get exposed, right? I
think our whole thing really is the
highest level of of security. So um
that's I guess that's one of the main um
main principles that we that we stick
to. Um I think what you what you then as
a startup have to look at is um
prioritization. I think that's that's
what matters. Um because you cannot
build out everything in a perfect way
right from the right from the beginning.
So you you you basically um yeah have to
pick an area where you want to find
product market fit and then expand from
that. And so I think we've we've done
that. Um and
um that's also one of the one of the
reasons I think why um yeah why we're
building those those things on on Solana
and I guess in crypto in general because
um it's an area where um this need for
privacy and encrypted execution is is
very tangible and it's it's easier to
work together with teams and and get
them to adopt this technology whereas in
traditional industries um it can be it
can be tougher and it can it can take
longer right so I think that's that's a
very conscious decision on our end as a
startup um to be to be really really
focused on this area
>> yeah I I think the key takeaway here is
that like have ultimate clarity in what
you're doing as a business and then
everything kind of like builds around it
and es especially you know when you're
when you're operating on some of these
foundational cryptography, you can't
rigor is the way to go.
>> You can't really mock things. Um, you
you you really have to have all of the
cryptography in place and it needs to be
mathematically sound and proven. Um,
yeah, that's that's the battle that we
picked. I guess I I have one last
question. You mentioned that you're, you
know, working with some web two clients
where, you know, they want to do
multi-party machine learning. So how
does the technology work? Because this
involves I mean machine learning as I
understand involves a tremendous amount
of matrix multiplication. So when you
apply that to a setup like MPC how do
you one deal with so many number of
multiplication and also at the same time
like how do you overcome the
communication basically the
communication penality.
>> We have a we have a paper specifically
addressing this question I guess. um
which is the Monticor paper on our
research section of our website. Um so
that's um that's basically the protocol
that um so so so RQM uses two core
protocols Cberus and Monticor. Cberus
really is that which which powers the
RUM network and um confidential SPL
token and all of those things. Um and
ser monticore is tailored for AI
applications. Um and so the points that
you've mentioned um are exactly all of
the points that this this protocol
addresses. Um and
the the team that we've acquired had
developed this protocol for more than
eight years and and done all of the
required I guess cryptographic MPC
research um to to get that into
fruition. Um what's so powerful about it
is that um machine learning itself I
guess has has two aspects right it's the
training aspect um which requires all of
those operations and then the
interference um aspect um but I think um
where it becomes really complicated if
we look at LLMs for example right um
where there's even um many orders of
magnitude more operations involved um
and um what we were able to run earlier
this year um was for example um an
inference using um the 16 billion
parameter model um of DeepSeek within
MPC in a fully encrypted way. Um and so
the question that you always have to to
ask yourself I guess when when when
running these computations is if you
have public model weights it becomes
cheaper. um if the model weights are
encrypted and the the the prompt I guess
um is encrypted that then um becomes
very difficult to scale. um if one of
those um is public it becomes easier and
for machine learning I think um
um the the important aspect that um that
Monticor is addressing is that um it's
in a very smart way um um solving the
real number arithmetic problem um
because usually you would operate over
um over finite field elements um and
with with Monticor there's basically the
um fixed point um floating fixed point
arithmetic whereas um it it basically at
compile time of the circuit identifies
um the best um um point fixture based on
on on floatingoint values. So um all of
the details of of this protocols um sort
of go over my head. I am unfortunately
um not as good a cryptographer as as all
of the team members um that I have. But
um I think what all of those AI
applications really are for me is um a
testament to how powerful the technology
really can be. Um and um we
especially when when doing machine
learning operations
um
have seen that um the the runtime um is
is is very good and I guess it always
depends on um it it depends on the type
of data sets that you're evaluating. So
on in in in the web two um application
that we have it is medical data for
example um where it's um basically um
scans um and um
the the technology had also been used
Monteor had also been used for um 3D
lung scans as far as I know in the past.
So um yeah at the end of the day uh what
I'm trying to say is that um matrix
multiplication over real numbers so
tensor operations is specifically what
this uh protocol is fine-tuned for um
which is something that with uh Cberus
for example would be quite difficult to
do. So with Cberus it would be way more
difficult and basically impractical to
run these these computations. That's why
Cberus as a protocol really is
fine-tuned for for those onchain
operations. Um and Monteor really is
fine-tuned for those AI applications. Um
and yeah, both of those together um I I
guess um from Archium um but um what you
don't need for Monticor for example is a
Rust interface. You don't need to
program something with Arcus because
that's not what machine learning
engineers do. um instead we have a
Python um interface where you can just
use pandas and and TensorFlow interfaces
to to specify the um the the the
training and inference workflows.
>> Oh, that's awesome. It also brings us to
the end of the podcast. Thank you so
much for joining us, Yanik. like after
this personally after this podcast like
I'm so pumped about RPM uh when it goes
on mainet and I would also personally
like to get my hands dirty and build
something on top of RKM.
>> Yeah, thank you very much.
>> Thank you for joining us.
>> Thanks for having me. All right.